                    Steve Mynott : Hacking in Progress 97

   [hip 97 logo picture] The Dutch, like the Germans, have always had a
   strong alternative computer scene, which has combined technical
   knowledge with art and a flair for publicity. A Dutch campsite was the
   base for a three-day computer festival organised by Hacktic. This was a
   Dutch organisation that used to publish a Hacker's magazine (in Dutch)
   and has now gone above ground to run XS4ALL -- the main Dutch ISP. They
   are vaguely political (anti-government) and pro-liberty prompting the
   playful and creative use of technology.

   I arrived in Holland without luggage. My backpack was lost by the
   airline and I had nowhere to sleep. Fortunately a [3]friend let me
   sleep in her tent. The campsite was barren, dry and kilometres from
   anywhere. There was a large tent with a bar, which I headed straight
   for.

   The first thing I noticed was the HIPCOR robot, a mobile trolley with
   video camera and speech synthesis. It was controlled from a web page
   with embedded Java applets. I was talking with an American in a cowboy
   hat and the remotely controlled HIPCOR navigated its way up to him and
   spoke to him in a Stephen Hawkins voice, "Hello, nice hat", before
   going away. Generally the computers people were using in this main area
   were PCs, most running Linux or Windows. I saw one Mac, one Sun 3 and a
   MicroVAX as well and old DEC VT220 terminals were on sale for about a
   tenner.

   The campsite was full of tents and caravans as is usual for such a
   place. More strangely many had been connected using blank ethernet --
   the very sight of which sent a cold shiver of recognition down my
   spine. People were sitting in tents with beers and computers playing
   networked Quake.

   The main tent was an old circus tent and was huge with enough room for
   one thousand people. Unfortunately it had the effect of focusing and
   amplifying the already excessive heat on the sweating and dehydrated
   victims sitting in it. By the final day an attempt had been made to
   open it up a bit more and to spray cold water on it.

   The first thing I saw was a demonstration of the "Van Eck effect". The
   idea was to pick up the screen display of someone's monitor at a
   distance to read the information off it. The lecturer was a German
   professor and spoke heavily accented English. He was very much as a
   German professor might be shown in a film. He spoke a lot about "Ze
   Incriminating Emissions", which seemed rather funny at the time.

   He had an aerial, which looked like an unconvincing Dr Who prop,
   attached to a standard TV. The circus tent atmosphere led somehow to
   the impression that he was a stage magician performing tricks. Also the
   audience's habit of cheering after each trick didn't help. On the
   target PC screen were a few words in a very large font and he was able
   to display this up on the TV. He also put a device around the power
   supply lead and could pick up a better picture this way. There were
   mutterings from the audience, many of whom seemed unimpressed. At the
   question session the poor chap got a rather hard ride. The gist of it
   being "What we have been shown is twenty years old, there are modern
   digital techniques that are much better". His reply was "They are very
   expensive and we have only just got the equipment and the results
   aren't finished yet." The counter measures were Tempest shielding.

   In short if your password is visible on your monitor in letters three
   inches high and there is a van outside your office with a large aerial
   and German plates this might mean trouble. Or maybe the NSA can pick it
   up anyway from America using the "newer techniques".

   Most workshops and lectures were on cryptography with a heavy presence
   from the Cypherpunks and the PGP people. An example being a lecture on
   PGP security problems. Most of the problems were fairly minor and
   weren't really problems if you carefully read the document ion or had
   been fixed in the latest PGP -- PGP 5. In particular you shouldn't rely
   on either the KeyID or fingerprint of a PGP key as a substitute for the
   key itself, since both could be faked. Also, and this is fairly
   obvious, the passphrase for your key should be hard to guess, not a
   simple, guessable word such as one that might appear in a dictionary.

   The US only version (legal versions) of PGP 5 had been out for some
   weeks, but there was not yet a legal international version. Since
   exporting crypto source in electronic form from the US is illegal. They
   had to ship out the program in printed form and use OCR (Optical
   Character Recognition) to convert it back into machine-readable form
   and manually correcting any errors. The release was intended for the
   cypherpunk meeting on Sunday afternoon. Whether they made their
   deadline I don't know -- but the software was certainly available by
   the following day from the International PGP Home Page.

   PGP 5 is much easier to use than any previous version and can plugin
   straight into Eudora to encrypt email for security or sign email to
   prove its origin. It is intended that you register your email address
   and key on an internet keyserver. Another talk was on anonymous
   remailers. The old penet one in Finland was discussed. The problem was
   that this was a insecure database of geninue email addresses and the
   corresponding anonymous ones. This had been shut down following the
   Church of Scientology getting a legal ruling in Finland that comprised
   the security of the database. The cypherpunks had a remailer but this
   was subject to traffic analysis. A new scheme was presented that was
   extremely complex. Messages were broken up and encrypted and hidden
   with other messages and with junk padding. There would be a chain of
   these anonymous remailer machines around the world and the system would
   even be safe if one remailer operator was corrupt. The whole system was
   to be written in PERL. The contact was shamrock@netcom.com.

   One lecture was particularly interesting in the insight given into the
   former Hacktic organisation. Rop Gonggrijp (former Hacktic leader)
   talked about legal problems one of their number (known as "The Key")
   was now having. The Dutch had a pager system called "Semafoon" and The
   Key had built a device to tap these transmission called "Semafun".

   Rop spoke excellent English and was a compelling speaker. The Key's
   device could actually tap three pagers at once and was linked to a PC
   to built a database of who was calling who. Hacktic had used this
   device to play practical jokes on people and The Key had sold two
   devices. One was sold to a former Hacktic member who was now involved
   in electronic intelligence for the Dutch Police, the other sold to a
   very dodgy individual involved in fraud and MDMA manufacture. The Key
   was now prosciuted under a conspiracy charge as a hi-tech criminal.
   Actually software to do what his device did was now downloadable free
   off the internet anyway. It was suggested The Key had been made a
   scapegoat to draw attention off Dutch police corruption charges. Also
   it admitted that The Key's habit of following the police and Dutch MI5
   around and spying on them probably hadn't helped. The general
   impression was The Key was probably a bit naive and odd, but probably
   harmless and had been very unlucky.

   There was a gravestone outside the tent which (optimistically) was Mr
   Gates. People had left things by it -- amusing cartoons and slogans and
   symbolically a half-eaten Apple. The idea was that at 7,00pm on
   Saturday a toast was made, rather optimistically, in Jolt (the high
   sugar/caffiene softdrink favoured by programmers) to Mr Gate's death.

   On the Saturday evening it had been intended to broadcast a live Video
   Conference with a similar event taking place in New York. However, it
   didn't work, bar a few seconds of poor quality video and a few test
   screens and despite the embrassed technician trying desperately, so I
   left and attended a PERL workshop where Gary Howland basically sung the
   praises of PERL.

   He had written PERL libraries to implement common cryptographical
   functions (DES, IDEA, BLOWFISH etc.) also one, to be made available,
   which allowed the construction of fake TCP packets, as used in TCP
   spoofing. He was writing a web browser proxy in Java to run
   client-side. It was intended to be modular to allow particularly neat
   browser customisation. For example, you could easily screen out
   doubleclick.com and similar banner adverts, which could have
   unfortunate results for web companies using them.

   On Saturday night late in the bar there was loud and fast techno
   playing and a heavy cloud of Dutch grass had descended. Fortunately
   Dutch "Gabber" made only rare appearances. I spent much time talking to
   a strange Englishman, currently resident in Holland and of vague and
   unspecified occupation. He seemed to poccess a detailed and far-ranging
   knowledge, apparently based on personal experience, of various forms of
   creditcard fraud and of the American social security system and many
   genuinely entertaining and fascinating stories.

   On the final day there was a practical demonstration of spoofing
   enabling a telnet session to be hijacked. The best solution was IP
   Security or something like secure shell (SSH). One very amusing video
   shown which was very popular with the audience was the old Apple advert
   "Winsongs" which featured pastiches of rock videos with the lyrics
   altered to express anti-Windows sentiments, eg. a fake MCHammer but
   singing "Can't use this" and the Tears of a Clone. The FTP site for the
   video is [4]ftp://194.0.135.49

   The conference program forbid actually illegal hacking (cracking) and
   there was far less visible of this than there had been at the "Hacking
   At the End of Universe" in 1993, excepting a few kids running sniffers
   (network tap programs) on the LAN. Wandering around the hall revealed
   most people to be simply be browsing or on IRC. A low but visible Dutch
   police presence was there at the camp. One friend made the comment this
   was like a Computer Glastonbury Festival. To summarise: the feeling of
   the whole camp was that of a technically aware internet/computer
   culture. The whole thing was well organised and many speakers
   interesting.

   [5]^ back to top
                     ___________________________________

   Updated: 990516 [6]steve@tightrope.demon.co.uk
